# PARTICLE SWARM OPTIMIZATION BASED ENERGY EFFICIENT CLUSTER HEAD SELECTION ALGORITHM FOR WSN
WSN is organized into clusters for effective data collection in the context of
energy dissipation. Clustering not only organizes a deployed network into a
linked hierarchy but also balances network load, extending the system's
lifespan. In a cluster-based WSN, each sensor node communicates the
information it has acquired to the cluster coordinator. The cluster coordinator
is responsible for aggregating the gathered data and routing it to the deployed
network's sink.

The main problem is cluster head selection in the wireless sensor
networks. Cluster heads are elected so that they will gather all the local data
from their own area and forward it to the base station after aggregating it. If we don’t select cluster heads then there will be a lot of data redundancy and
that will have to be handled by the base station alone. For this purpose, the
base station delegates its work to these cluster heads.

Sensors lose energy over time as they transmit data. To minimize the
energy loss it is inevitable to develop a clustering protocol that is efficient in
conserving energy for dragging out the span of the network. Clustering
improves the scalability of the network significantly and conserves
communication bandwidth.

The study focuses on the CH selection problem and presents a PSObased solution to solve it. Among the regular sensor nodes, the proposed
technique efficiently picks the CHs. The CH selection issue is given a linear
programming (LP) model. It is suggested that a PSO-based method be used.
The suggested PSO technique is based on a particle encoding approach that is
both efficient and effective. To make the PSO-based technique energy
efficient, the fitness function is also generated by considering various distance
factors and residual energy.

